---
layout: default
title: "POLSC201: Introduction to Western Political Thought"
course_description: "An examination of the major texts and figures in the history of political thought, including Plato, Machiavelli, and Rousseau. Topics incldue power, justice, rights, law, and other issues pertaining to governance."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "POLSC201: Introduction to Western Political Thought"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Political thought, or political philosophy, is the study of questions
concerning power, justice, rights, law, and other issues pertaining to
governance. Whereas political science assumes that these concepts are
what they are, political thought asks how they have come about and to
what effect. Just as Socrates’s simple question “How should we be
governed?” led to his execution, the question “What makes a government
legitimate?” leads to political turmoil when posed at critical times.
Political thought asks what form government should take and why; what
duties citizens owe to a legitimate government, if any; and when it may
be legitimately overthrown, if ever. Generally speaking, political
thought, political philosophy, and political theory are terms often used
interchangeably to mean the study of philosophical texts related to
politics. This course examines major texts in the history of political
thought. Many of these texts pose difficult questions concerning the
political community, social order, and human nature. This course asks
how different views on human nature and the uses of history inform the
design of government. It also considers the ways in which thinkers like
Plato, Machiavelli, and Rousseau have responded to the political
problems of their times, and the ways in which they contribute to a
broader conversation about human goods and needs, justice, democracy,
and the ever-changing relationship between the citizen and the state.
One of our central aims in this course will be to gain a critical
perspective on our times by evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of
various regimes and philosophical approaches. We will also work to
better understand those assumptions and basic concepts that define the
field of political science. Each of the three units that comprise this
course is devoted to a broad theme central to understanding politics.
The first unit, centered upon the texts of Plato and Aristotle, will
address the *polis*, or political community. The second unit, featuring
the work of John Locke, Niccolò Machiavelli, and Thomas Hobbes, will
explore the modern state and constitutional government. The third unit,
introducing the texts of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Alexis de Tocqueville,
Karl Marx, and Friedrich Engels, will focus on democracy and the
critique of liberal ideology. You will find that these political
philosophies have shaped various forms of government, from tyranny to
republican democracy and welfare states. It should be noted that the
terms politics, political theory, and political science are used
throughout the course, but not interchangeably so. While they all relate
to each other, each has a different meaning. Politics is the use of
power and the distribution of resources. Political theory, on the other
hand, is the study of the concepts and principles that people use to
describe, explain, and evaluate political events and institutions.
Traditionally, the discipline of political theory has approached this
study from three different perspectives: classic, modern, and
contemporary political theory – all will be covered in this course.
Finally, political science is an academic discipline concerned with the
study of the state, government, and politics. Aristotle defined
political science as “the study of the state.” If you’re interested in
reading philosophy or thinking about life purpose and social
organization, this might be a good course for you to take. Additionally,
if you like to debate, consider alternative viewpoints, or talk about
politics this course will likely interest you. Also, Western political
thought has served, in one form or another, as the philosophical and
ideological basis for governments around the world for centuries,
including the United States. Hopefully, this course will allow you to
put yourself within an historical, social, and cultural setting so you
may relate to contemporary political society. **This course provides
students the opportunity to earn actual college credit. It has been
reviewed and recommended for 3 credit hours by [The National College
Credit Recommendation Service](http://www.nationalccrs.org/) (NCCRS).
 While credit is not guaranteed at all schools, we have
[partnered](http://www.saylor.org/partner-schools/) with a number of
schools who have expressed their willingness to accept transfer of
credits earned through Saylor. You can read more about our NCCRS program
[here](http://www.saylor.org/student-credit-pathways/nccrs/).**
![National College Credit Recommendation
Service](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/NCCRS_Logo.png "National College Credit Recommendation Service")

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

-   summarize the passage of political thought through the classical,
    Renaissance, and Enlightenment periods based on the works of Plato,
    Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Tocqueville, and
    Marx;
-   compare and contrast the differences between Plato and Aristotle
    with regard to their understandings of the nature of the person,
    ethics, society, citizenship, and governance;
-   explain the historical and intellectual context in which the
    political thought that helped to develop the modern state came to
    be;
-   compare and contrast the concepts of justice, freedom, equality,
    citizenship, and sovereignty in the works of Machiavelli, Hobbes,
    Locke, and Rousseau;
-   explain the different versions of, and importance of, *the state of
    nature* to political thought;
-   identify the influences of Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau on the
    development of the United States Constitution;
-   summarize the thoughts of Alexis de Tocqueville on the American
    political landscape, particularly with regard to religion and
    equality, and why this has importance beyond the American context;
-   explain Karl Marx’s worldview, with particular regard to his
    critique of democracy and the modern, politically liberal state; how
    it came to be; and its fundamental link to capitalism; and
-   explain John Stuart Mill’s theory on utilitarianism and how he
    applies it to society and the state.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    have access to a computer;  
  
 √    have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash);  
  
 √    have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.);  
  
 √    have competency in the English language;  
  
 √    have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf);
and  
  
 √    have completed the following course from [The Core
Program](http://www.saylor.org/majors/political-science/) of the
political science discipline: [POLSC101: Introduction to
Politics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/polsc101/).

### Course Information

Welcome to POLSC201. General information about this course and its
requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course is composed of a range of different
free, online materials. However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:

-   Benjamin Jowett’s translation of Plato’s
    *[Republic](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.html) *(HTML)
-   W. D. Ross’s translation of Aristotle’s *[Nicomachean
    Ethics](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.3.iii.html)* (HTML)
-   Benjamin Jowett’s translation of Plato’s
    *[Apology](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html) *(HTML)
-   Benjamin Jowett’s translation of Plato’s
    *[Crito](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/crito.html) *(HTML)
-   Benjamin Jowett’s translation of Aristotle’s
    *[Politics](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/politics.html) *(HTML)
-   W. K. Marriott’s translation of Niccolò Machiavelli’s *[The
    Prince](http://www.constitution.org/mac/prince00.htm)* (HTML)
-   Thomas Hobbes’s
    *[Leviathan](http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/h/hobbes/thomas/h68l/) *(HTML)
-   John Locke’s *[Second Treatise of
    Government](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7370)* (HTML, iBook, and
    Kindle)
-   G. D. Cole’s translation of Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s *[Discourse on
    Inequality](http://www.constitution.org/jjr/ineq.htm)* (HTML)
-   Henry Reeve’s translation of Alexis de Tocqueville’s *[Democracy in
    America](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/toc_indx.html)* (HTML)
-   Samuel Moore’s translation of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels’s
    *[Manifesto of the Communist
    Party](http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html)* (HTML)
-   John Stuart Mill’s *[On
    Liberty](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/34901)* (HTML)
-   Professor Steven B. Smith’s *[Introduction to Political
    Philosophy](http://oyc.yale.edu/political-science/plsc-114)* (HTML)

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials.
The course builds upon itself from one unit to the next, so it is
important to work thoroughly through each section to understand what
follows. It is also important to answer the study guide questions to
challenge your retention and understanding of the material. You will
also need to complete the Final Exam.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
respond to the study guide questions.  
  
 In order to *pass* this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
grade on the Final Exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as
soon as you complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it
again.  
  
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately **133.75 hours** to complete, not including the final
exam. Each unit includes a “time advisory” that lists the amount of time
you are expected to spend on each subunit. These should help you plan
your time accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at these time
advisories and to determine how much time you have over the next few
weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for yourself. For
example, Unit 1 should take approximately 45.5 hours to complete.
Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to complete
subunit 1.1 (a total of 3 hours) on Monday night; subunit 1.2 (a total
of 3.25 hours) on Tuesday; subunit 1.3 (a total of 2.25 hours) on
Wednesday night; etc.  
  
 **Tips/Suggestions:** It may be helpful to take notes as you work
through the materials in each unit, especially in response to the study
guide questions. Answering the study questions and reviewing your notes
will also help you prepare for the Final Exam.
